hi everyone my name is Dr Mark eatonson
welcome to heal NPD in his essay of
anger the Renaissance philosopher
Michelle de montaigne writes about a
nobleman named piso who was known for
his passionate anger
when one of the men under piezo's
command went missing Piezo sentenced
another man under his command to die on
the charge of murder
but on the day of the execution the
missing man was found and the
Executioner took both men to see piso
now everyone thought that Pisa would be
overjoyed and that the charges against
The Condemned man would be dropped
because clearly he was not guilty of
murder but instead the opposite happened
piso sentenced all three men to die
first because he'd already been
condemned to death the second the one
who'd been missing but was then found he
was sentenced to death because according
to Piezo his going missing in the first
place was the cause of the first man's
death and the Executioner was sentenced
to death because he'd failed to carry
out pizzo's original orders
[Music]
so today's episode is about narcissistic
rage and the story of piso has been
cited as an example of this phenomenon
when proven wrong Pisa was unable to see
beyond the shame and humiliation that he
felt and the pressure to get away from
those feelings caused him to overreact
to assert his authority over those who
had embarrassed him
such overreactions are compensatory
they're designed to restore a kind of
balance or equilibrium inside the person
in response to the threat of internal
collapse or fragmentation
more severe overreactions typically
suggest a higher degree of disorder and
more fragile internal organization
but what actually causes narcissistic
rage is it a reflection of grandiosity
of entitlement of arrogance or is it
about an inability to tolerate flaws and
Imperfections
while to some extent it's usually all of
the above
part of the issue is that narcissistic
rage is caused by fundamental confusion
between the self and other people and it
represents a defense against the
feelings of helplessness humiliation and
shame
for this episode I'll mostly be
referencing the work of Ernest wolf he
was a frequent collaborator of Heinz
kohut and author of the book treating
the self elements of clinical
self-psychology
now according to Wolf narcissistic rage
is directed at self objects who pose a
threat to the self or who have caused
damage to the self
you may recall from earlier episodes the
term self object it's a clinical term
for a person place or thing or even a
concept that's used to define the
experience of self
we all have and use self objects
especially when we're young our
self-objects tend to be people mom dads
siblings other caretakers self-object
experiences from these people from Early
Childhood tend to be tangible and
Hands-On they tend to include
experiences like holding caressing
cuddling
Etc the quality of these early
interactions helps to Define our
experience of selfhood the way we're
treated by these self-objects it tells
us who we are and what we're worth and
it's important to understand that early
self-objects aren't experienced by
children as separate other people Mom
Dad Etc are actually experienced by
young children as parts or extensions of
the self and this is partly because
children are incredibly egocentric they
haven't developed a stable enough sense
of self to individuate that is separate
psychologically from those around them
and that's partly why early
relationships have such power over
shaping our identity
but as we grow and the self-consolidates
into a more cohesive and well-defined
whole
self-object experiences tend to become
more abstract instead of using other
people as self-objects adults who have a
stable and positive sense of self tend
to develop abstract self-object
relationships with things like their
role in a community their profession
their identification with political
ideologies or their religious beliefs
since self-objects are experienced as
extensions of the self it's pathological
for adults to continue using other
people as self-objects like they did
when they were children
but in pathological narcissism and NPD
the self has been wounded at an early
age and this wounding has created
vulnerabilities and fragilities in the
structure of the self
the self is unable to sort of stand on
its own two feet the person tends to
rely on the kinds of self objects that
we all used as children they may need
other people to actively admire or
idealize them they may have a basic
confusion between self and other
treating other people as extensions of
self the drawback to having such porous
inters psychic boundaries is that the
words and actions of other people
continue to have tremendous impact on
the experience of self someone with
pathological narcissism or NPD tends to
pursue positive self-object experiences
with a kind of Relentless pressure but
they'll also seek to eliminate bad
self-object experiences with an equal
fervor according to Wolf when a
self-object no longer fulfills the
function of sustaining the self and
instead is making the self feel helpless
there's a need inside the narcissist to
eliminate the offending self-object
it isn't enough to Simply ignore the
offending self-object it isn't enough to
communicate anger and then let it go
because the self-object is experienced
as a part or extension of the self it
must be eliminated or it will continue
to threaten the stability of the self
this attempt to eliminate or expel the
offending self-object is the reason for
the alarming overreactions and the
intensity that often characterizes
narcissistic rage wolf writes the self
feels helpless vexed and mortified that
is paralyzed while agitated to the
extreme and in deathly danger of losing
its integrity
such as self-state is unbearable and
must be altered the offending
self-object of the totally ashamed self
must be made to disappear violently if
necessary even if the whole world Goes
Up in Flames
he goes on to say that the origin of
narcissistic rage must be sought in the
childhood experience of utter
helplessness vis-a-vis the humiliating
self-object
such experiences of helplessness are
unbearably painful because they threaten
the very continuity and existence of the
self and they therefore evoke the
strongest emergency defense in the form
of narcissistic rage end quote
wolf is saying that the origins of
narcissistic rage can be found in the
very early experiences of helplessness
and humiliation that became a part of
the fabric from which the self is woven
these early experiences of humiliation
or helplessness had such a profound
impact because they occurred at a time
when the very Foundation of selfhood was
being laid
they become constant threats to the
structure of self-experience they're
easily triggered and difficult to manage
in some ways it's similar to the ways
that traumatic experience can be
triggered and that's because these early
experiences of humiliation and
helplessness are in fact a form of
relational trauma that has disrupted
psychological and emotional development
wounded in this way the self is unable
to develop a central stability and a
basic positivity the person is
constantly struggling with these
poisonous feelings and constantly
managing the internal threat that they
represent
and this leads to distortions and
self-experience and self-image
to compensate for the shame humiliation
and helplessness a self-image that is
unrealistically positive even idealized
is often constructed but it's prone to
collapse because it's not based in
reality the threat of collapse then
causes the person to press even harder
into the grandiosity to pressure those
around them even more to help prop up
this false compensatory self-image
but this leads others to eventually
abandon the narcissistic person and that
sends them spiraling into the underlying
shame and humiliation that everything
was constructed to cover over in the
first place over time a sort of
intolerance to this cycle of inflation
and collapse develops within the
narcissistic individual
unable to recognize that the
vulnerability lies inside their own self
they continue to rely on those around
them to live up to idealized
expectations and to deliver idealizing
self-object experiences that are
designed to keep the self in working
order
when a self-object fails to do this
which exposes The Narcissist to that old
buried shame and triggers that old
relational trauma the response is often
narcissistic rage now this rage is
usually directed at the offending
self-object a spouse a family member
sometimes a co-worker and this is
because self-objects are typically those
who are close to the narcissistic
individual it's unusual for that sort of
Rage to be directed at someone they
don't know or at someone they would
otherwise seek to impress the rage can
be so overwhelming and so intense
because it's born of a fundamental
confusion between self and other
the narcissist is holding those around
them accountable for an issue that
they've been trying and failing to cope
with their entire lives
but in a state of collapse this rage can
also be directed at the self which can
be experienced as deficient humiliating
and ashamed
and this is where self-harm sometimes
becomes a significant risk for
narcissistic individuals such rage can
also be expressed in the moment but for
many individuals there can also be a
delay of days weeks months or even years
between the offending incident and the
expression of the Rage or the anger
about that incident
painful memory becomes a slow boiling
resentment it can be expressed in the
form of violent outbursts or coldly
calculating destructiveness it can look
like screaming physical violence smug
callousness or a cold shoulder that
makes the offending self-object feel
like they're invisible unimportant
useless or barely tolerated it can also
be expressed toward the original
offending self-object the person who
originally caused the wound in the self
but it's more often expressed much later
toward a substitute self-object someone
who fails the individual in a manner
that's reminiscent of the original wound
the developers of the pathological
narcissism inventory which is a recent
assessment that measures both grandiose
and vulnerable facets of pathological
narcissism use the term entitlement rage
to describe this phenomenon
interestingly though they don't place
this index on the grandiose scale
instead they see entitlement rage as a
reflection of vulnerability
and that's because entitled expectations
represent a deficit in the person's
ability to recognize the difference
between the self and other people
individuals with pathological narcissism
hold other people accountable for their
own feelings and vulnerabilities they
become enraged when others don't
magically anticipate the narcissistic
individual's needs thoughts and feelings
and this isn't so much because the
person thinks that other people should
serve them as it is because the person
engages in a sort of constant projection
a constant egocentrism just like
children can be egocentric they assume
that everyone feels the way they do they
assume that everyone sees the world from
their perspective and this assumption is
often implicit if you were to ask
someone with pathological narcissism or
NPD if they understand that other people
have separate perspectives they would of
course say yes but their actions and
assumptions about the world tell a
different story they know cognitively
that other people have different
perspectives but that awareness hasn't
been allowed to impact to their
unconscious assumptions and that's
because of deficits and damage in the
structure of the self
entitlement rage stems from this
underlying deficit on the surface it may
seem like the person is angry because
you didn't do exactly what they expected
or wanted you to do but if we translate
that anger at an unconscious level it's
more like you've made them feel
powerless and unimportant and expose
them to incredibly painful feelings of
Shame and inadequacy that they don't
know how to cope with and because
they're confused about where you stop
and they begin their feelings of
disappointment become flaws in you that
they can't tolerate so they feel they
must punish you perhaps severely in
order to re-establish an internal
equilibrium within their self
now I want to be crystal clear I'm not
saying that anyone should tolerate abuse
or mistreatment just because we can
understand the painful and even tragic
origins of this sort of behavior doesn't
mean it's okay
every Behavior has a cause and me
pointing out one possible explanation
for narcissistic rage is not the same
thing as me making apologies for it or
telling people in abusive relationships
to roll over and give the person one
more chance I can't tell you how many
times people have confused my analysis
of the psychology behind narcissism with
me making some kind of apology for
abusive mistreatment of other people if
you're being abused seek help and seek
support if you've been abused and you're
no longer in contact with that person or
you're in recovery or you're trying to
heal please know that this video is not
meant to undermine invalidate or quote
Gaslight your experience there are
millions of individuals in the world
with some variation of pathological
narcissism they aren't all identical
your experiences may vary as a society I
think we should strive to view mental
illness through a compassionate lens but
as individuals we're each empowered to
do what's necessary within the bounds of
the law to protect our rights to
physical and emotional safety I've
learned that I need to be extremely
explicit about that because there's so
much pain and so much confusion out
there surrounding this disorder
okay so how is narcissistic rage
addressed in treatment well according to
Wolf what the self needs is to be
understood
however that doesn't mean that the self
needs approval of its rage it may take a
very long time of just soaking up
empathic understanding alone before a
gradual fading away of the rage takes
place
a similar sentiment can be found in the
2020 paper by Glenn gabbard and Holly
crisp entitled principles of
psychodynamic treatment for patients
with narcissistic personality disorder
the self must be allowed to heal and
that healing takes time it also takes
understanding and something called
empathic witnessing
part of what makes the wound so
intolerable is the feeling of being
Invisible unacknowledged invalidated by
the very self-objects who inflicted the
wound in the first place
their refusal to acknowledge the harm
done becomes the narcissistic
individual's inability to validate or
even see that wound inside of themselves
and this is where therapy comes into
play one of the central roles of a
therapist treating pathological
narcissism is to provide empathic
Attunement and validation which is
different than gratification a therapist
should not gratify narcissistic rage
they should not agree with it and
support its pathological expression
rather they should validate the
underlying pain that produces it and
help the person to gradually be able to
recognize the wound itself and to
tolerate the self's pain without needing
to project that pain onto those around
them and this is a process that really
takes two people
but what if you don't have access to a
therapist right now how can you work
toward easing the reactivity inside of
yourself that results in expressions of
narcissistic rage
well I'm reminded of a book that I read
when I was in training called The Four
Agreements by Don Miguel Ruiz in which
he advises the reader to never take
anything personally he writes don't take
anything personally what others say and
do is a projection of their own reality
their own dream
when you're immune to the opinions and
the actions of others you won't be the
victim of needless suffering
good advice
perhaps easier said than done
but that doesn't mean you can't begin to
prioritize not taking things personally
it'll take some time maybe a long time
but you can start working on this today
right now
the things that other people do are
reflections of their choices their
thoughts their feelings their
motivations almost nobody does anything
because of you
that's both good and bad news
it means you're less important than
perhaps you feel you need to be
but it also means you don't need to take
on the failures of other people nor do
you need to worry that their failure to
consider you is somehow a reflection on
your own worth
focus on reinforcing the line between
you and others make it a conscious
practice to try to perceive the
separateness of those around you your
thoughts and feelings belong to you
their thoughts and feelings belong to
them
if you feel ashamed or embarrassed maybe
it isn't because anybody wanted you to
feel that way
maybe those feelings are old maybe they
go way way back and maybe you don't have
to keep reliving the trauma in your
current relationships
okay so that's it for today as always
please leave comments questions
suggestions for future topics and please
consider giving this a like or a
subscribe if you found it helpful and
until next time take good care
[Music]
foreign